it's  fine if i'm wrong i don't want to be right if it's wrong
to  say to people look you know if you're living in much real
the  french his language spoken among all but you know what
the  mohawk or rather of the city limits you know really i met an think about
the  lagoon the be important the fact you're not moving to france to motcombe and
the  tokoyo to suggest like hey you could
but  i don't think it's a moral paradise
i  don't think it's something everybody has to do
i  think the question is if not you that
and  who is going to ask that question who is going to have to eat i know people who are right
intellectual  aspiring young people political activists may be the inactive maybe
ecological  activists
i  missed them he would view why aren't you one of the guides learning coronation
you  know he was going aesthetic the part said he there's another challenge here
on  one bovinator in this this kind of unwanted intrusion
you  know
resumptions  of white organless
the  white oromocto which is built on genocide i'm questioning
something  people don't want to be questioned and
i  don't feel bad about that for yes it as
but  if i can't see that
a  body
he  is a little bit about studying line
but  it's mostly about me and my life
dragged  my girl friend who through i mean you know she sees i just went through this with an
old  friend not a close personal friend but no friend
and  comes up from time to
now
studying  languages
but  i admit
kind  of
would  promote a perspective or even for the people who are friends it's kind of weird that i say to my friends things like
oh
if  you're moving to
plans
why  don't you
which  like an here's my representation
young  mac
you  can't even language right i have no i am no expert tease whatsoever
in  you'll anglomany other indigenous australian language
but  if you ask the question will come
why  would you say this
to  a friend o yours and a friend who doesn't have any particular coming
my  first answer where did the bat is partly
i  say this
i  am in a position to talk about this i have studied enough language
i  can make that
now  this come my own father
we
worked  on quite a number of
the  book he wrote like way before
he
chapter
however
my  father basically never
and  you know he was not in a position to say to someone a younger person or other person our colleague
look  if you want to get serious
for
you  got to buckle
and  my point is if you're serious about canadian politics
are  you serious about canada i just think period if you all can you go
that's  my perspective
and  i assure
and  i completely own i completely embrace take
responsibility
to  which is a brace
and  is a kind of unwonted
an  intrusion that people
to  say that people
oh  look if you're considering moving to
i  think you've got a comin
and  you know like i give similar advice if i talk to a white person
korean  is
or  i talk to what percy
you  know i talked about well if you're
cora  or greece or portugal then you gotta get series
lead  of languages of these places one of them such as you know greek korean
it
and  you know it
maybe  a little pretentious to extend that two languages
languages  that are not the majority on
counters  any more it may be a little bit pretentious it may be a little bit unexpected it may be a little bit jarring
and
he  that
but  if i can't see that
it  was say my own father wasn't in a position to set
anyone  else not even when
project
that's  for me as part of the background and that you know i talk about this partly because his sarape
several  times germinie you so i turned the
where  montanara attention to it and i do make fun
i  say oh you know so and so is
so  so it's going to hawaii and i said so well if you like
the  real
for  the whole in language and i used to be a contributor to an end
nor  no other so
and
so  you got to have to say at this juncture i mean that's my general point here is is always not a nice guy
i  adore
i  know people don't want to hear it i don't claim to be on the side of the nice guys this
i  know it's an unwanted truth i know it's disturbing i know its jar
then  it matters to
and  in my way i try to share that with people who are were part of my life
it's  fine if i'm wrong i don't want to be right if it's wrong
to  say that people look you know if you're living in much real
the  french is the language spoken at montreal but you know what the
mohawk  are right there on the city limits you know really you might want to think about mooching
with  the import of the fact that you're not moving to france
back  you know and again depending on where you are
if  you of i mean
if  you do this point no problem i'm not trying to squeeze it out of you in say
this  is a part of my life and my girl friend gets dragged through it you're going to be on a dinner party with me where
i  say this
like
i  don't think it's
well  you
i  don't think it's something everybody as
i  think the question is if not if not you
and  who's going to ask that question who is going to haculeshti know people who are bright
intellectual  aspiring young people political activists
activists  maybe ecological active
if  i will say to them he would have but you why aren't you one of the guides
who's  assertion you know who is going nahoon raise the bar
there's  another challenge here
the  sense of which are not so what but partly
it's  being a being a gad fly in the socratic
stimulating  people to quit
what  they doing with their time because if you are spending a lot your time playing video games watching
sports  one
going  to the beach do in rock climbing i knew a guy victorian was spending all his time
doing
parceling  you know where the
i  reorientation it's not something but you still like due for real
you  spend so many hours a week doing paralytic people do
all  constitute time
on  one level i accept a major
kind  of unwanted in
you  know
familiar  assumptions of
morgana
white  borgoforte which is built on genocide i'm questioning something
people  don't want to be questioned
i  don't feel bad about that but yes it
which  i don't feel like i'm being
then  talk to these
i  think in every case i don't know if i
in  every single case i can really say with no
in  the last two
age  two years enough
for  one of these languages
i
if  you put two years into
into  numa or into cree or into a jibway or into
change  or life for the better forever
it
much  real
you  know i really am sincere but that
you  know there are a lot of other things i can't say that about i can't say to you you know what if you put two years
in  and you really hit the books on advanced
you  would you could do you no backbone real example you could as a hobby do you know
what  if you take two years and buckled down and get up the university textbooks on theoretical
each  can't see that me coming from my background i can't see that at all
but  i can see you really sincerely you know if you live in
satan
learning  forewarning a jibway learning on the navel
it's  going to change your life forever
especially  if you are an english especially if you care about politics especially to care but i call
the  type of people in normally talking to the either really care about these things were they ostensibly
pretend  to
so  i don't think it's for no reason that i'm that i'm asking
i  see where you're going for i mean yes i know you like i understand why you
it's  what you
not  the esserson sighted not deal
right  you
there  is
the  radicals
which  i
if  you move to
greece  unless just say i know you have some reliable source of income you have enough
money
you  moved to
and  in the next five years you live in greece so in five years and you never lifted
you  are an athlete
so  that had she attained lonesome to talland you
moved  to talonlike in talland for five or so i don't know if you got your own money coming for her whatever you seniors
you  inherited money or what say i feel like an ass all because i don't know enough chinese
i  rotations feel like i really just right now enough i haven't stayed
me  i mean with each of these places as he moved to thailand on a move in talland for five years and you won't lift a finger
to  an ante
i  think there is i own son you do one thing to say oh well there's more than one we make a positive is the rod
yes  it is possible you move to grey
and  every day you are working on a cure for cancer in a laboratory and you say look
i  just can't peetie to learn
cause  my research on cancer is
so  important you move to toland but when your entire and every day you're doing
break  through scientific research at the large heron collier on particle physics
and  you say look you know what you're right i should learn tie but i got them maybe maybe but the
vast  majority of people your spending time on your ex box you're goin to the beach you're doing parlying
you're  doing surfing you're probably went to greece so you want to titanotherium or serving at a play
or  to go to the national exposition threateningly now what i mean no if you mean
if  you living in tiltowie years five years
this  is the funny thing on the one hand or a jack as if you
the  other hand the more of the most positive long term benefits you could possibly get at it
same  for learning
that  would change her life in a profound way for the better forever and i can remember back
when  i was struggling to speak lotion i was an earlier ly stage
having  this conversation with
who  you know survived the american bombardment by running away
and  you was kind of unbelievable journey she had going up the one
by  bombs and
you  know
oh  that's what you're opening the door to yes you can just read to wikipedia article on the history of lower
example  is you can't but you know what knowing the language is being those people and getting that human reality
and  the
living  in satin there's not much else and recommend you that all that meaningful
you
living  in talent and wherever these places are you know i do i do think
the  language
tremendously  positive the
tremendous  repository can open and yet two years is a
most  of them were there receptions most
the  rewards from the native people are going to be so positive
just  get to like percent the one you know when you're doing the tough part of our bill the ussuri
you're  a white person you really are working hard to use to pere to learn young
domain  what i mean there you're going to be a lot beware ye oh no we
actually  you said that wrong the word orders the opposite of whatever but yeah while it's great to choreman
you  know we all go at not all languages are like that if you go to paris right now when you speak broken french
french  people are not going to embrace you in so great that you made
the  person of luresome languages are alessio know again with creamy
it  was amazing to me how paused to the rank beaupres
really  positive people would say how you can speak five cents
then  they recognize your doing some positive for yourself
but  yet i mean the problem is
i
all  kind of races and
to  look at a language like green
been  totally different from a language
retire  this way
so  the calesaro back to me
i  on the
and  you you saw i showed you gangrene
nothing  i said to him albeit
nothing  talked about it
i'm  talking about the future
i  dressed in the fur
whether  it's in canada or still
what  have you
and  interesting your future
to  right what kind of person
what  kind of people are we
the  impact of a language not in even nothing of said as recommending language learning
in  order to study you like historical documents which could be you know that could be whitening
you  know
the  question is what kind of people are we in
and  again
the  horizon from learning a language it's not that far it's not
that  distant again i be secular chinese and seven months to one of the most difficult languages in
the  world you know and of course i could spend the next ten years just try to inch up
my  ability in chinese higher but i know enough chinese now you know what i mean
it's  something so positive you can do
he's  only going to positively enhance the
i  really feel and i can't see that about his
i  can't i can't even say that of a fisty there's no way i would be pushing by situation even
like  the most meaningful philosophy of the men
for  my perspective
there  is no way i can say to you right now you know you should you should really crack the ok
you  know for a particular person with a particular interest oh ye came
i  only say
to  me it has
it's  not about
it's  not about victim
the
see  what he has to put up with you
but